[TOC]

# 1. Jantelagen: Why Swedes won’t talk about wealth

In Stockholm’s richest inner-city neighbourhood, Östermalm, private yachts and floating cocktail bars hug the marina. The adjacent tree-lined boulevard, Strandvägen, boasts some of the most expensive real estate in the Swedish capital, as well as exclusive boutiques and independent restaurants. Nearby, ornate 18th Century buildings house luxurious office spaces and private member’s bars.
The area is packed with people in designer sunglasses soaking up the autumn sunshine. But finding someone who’s comfortable talking about their wealth is almost impossible.
“I'm not going to tell you how much I make because I don't know why I should,” says 30-year-old Robert Ingemarsson, who has a senior job in marketing. Asked what he does with his money, he says simply: “I spend it on stocks. I like investing”.
Standard narratives about Sweden tend to highlight its social democracy, high taxes and low income inequality by global standards. But while this stereotype is rooted in facts, the gap between the rich and the poor has been steadily widening since the 1990s. The top 20% of the population now earn four times as much as the bottom 20%.
A high income is a badge of success in many countries, but Swedes have a deep-rooted aversion to talking about their cash. Our repeated efforts to arrange interviews with young, wealthy Swedes proved tricky; off-the-record, people were happy to talk about large second homes, family yachts, sports cars or champagne sprees in nightclubs, but getting them to formalise their comments was a struggle.
But why is this? While discussing your wealth feels perfectly appropriate in some parts of the world, why does it seem like nobody in Stockholm is proud of being rich?

###### The concept of Jantelagen

Lola Akinmade Åkerström, an author on Swedish culture who’s been living in Stockholm for more than a decade, says talking about money is “a very uncomfortable subject” in Sweden. She argues that boasting about wealth – or even discussing a moderate salary with a stranger – is such a taboo that many Swedes would actually feel “more comfortable talking about sex and bodily functions”.
It is a view shared by Stina Dahlgren, a 28-year-old Swedish journalist who spent several years living in the US. “Over in the States, when you say that you're earning a lot of money, people are cheering for you and they say: ‘good for you, good work’. But over here in Sweden, if you say that you have a good salary... people think you're weird,” she says. “You don’t ask about salaries, you don't ask about money.”
Many cultural commentators agree that a large part of the taboo can be explained by a deep-
rooted Nordic code called Jantelagen, which promotes the idea of never thinking you are better than anyone else and calling out those who break this norm.
“Jantelagen is an unspoken societal rule that exists here in Sweden and a lot of the Nordics,” explains Akinmade Åkerström, who explores the topic in her book Lagom: The Swedish Secret of Living Well. “It’s about not being too flashy, not bragging unnecessarily, and it's a way of kind of keeping everybody – for the most part – equal... to remove sources of stress within group settings.”
“Jantelagen is a mechanism for social control,” he argues. “It’s not just about wealth, it’s about not pretending to know more than you do or acting above your station.”
Akinmade Äkerstöm argues that while Sweden has fought hard to maintain a global image as a classless social democracy, many Swedes still surround themselves with people in similar income brackets. This, she says, means that the rules of Jantelagen can therefore shift depending on the company; bragging is more acceptable among those with similar backgrounds.
“Behind closed doors with others of the same socio-economic status, they [richer people] are more comfortable. They can talk about their summer homes or their cars with everybody on the same level.”

###### A vocal backlash

However, growing numbers of young, successful Swedes are starting to criticise Jantelagen, and calling for a more vocal conversation about wealth and success.
These include Nicole Falciani, 22, who began earning money from blogging as a teenager and is now a major influencer, with 354,000 followers on Instagram.
“I would love it if Jantelagen would disappear, because I think that would be so much better for everyone living here... Our society would be much more open if we could talk about money,” she argues. “It's quite a nice thought that everyone should be equal and that we are all the same. But it doesn't work, because if you're working harder than anyone else, then you should be proud of it.”
Cornelius Cappelen, an associate professor in comparative politics at the University of Bergen in Norway, believes the rise of social media is behind the youth backlash against Jantelagen. He argues that blogging and video-blogging in particular support the kind of “rampant individualism” that promotes standing out from the crowd, which has, until recently, been far less prevalent in Nordic countries than other western nations, particularly the US.
“More and more people use the term [Jantelagen] as an abuse – especially many young people explicitly claim that they hate the mentality,” he argues.
Akinmade Åkerström also believes that social media has had a major impact. Since bragging has become commonplace on Facebook and Instagram, Swedes whose personal achievements stand out have started to feel more comfortable making their success public, she argues.
“There are very skilled, talented people that have been suppressed by Jantelagen, but then they’ve seen mediocre people bragging (online) with confidence.”
The author believes that Jantelagen is also becoming less popular due to a rise in immigration. In Sweden, the most diverse of the Nordic nations, around 25% of people were born abroad or have two foreign parents. “What other cultures are bringing in is celebrating your success, celebrating talented people, celebrating skills,” she says.

# 2.Why do some studies show that women are less competitive than men?

The field of experimental economics has exploded in the past decade, and with it has developed the study of gender differences. Women have different attitudes than men toward competition, toward risk, toward altruism, researchers say. When we think about the gender gap in pay, it’s easy to blame discrimination, but here an argument has emerged about another kind of sexism—the damning effects of gendered norms.

Muriel Niederle, a professor at Stanford, has studied these issues at length. In 2007, she and Lise Vesterlund published an experiment in which they rewarded people for adding up two-digit numbers over and over again. This is a task that men and women can perform equally well. Yet the researchers found that women were much less confident in their abilities, and this caused them to shy away from situations in which they would have to compete with others.

###### Gender and competitive games

In the non-competitive version of the experiment, participants would get 50 cents for every right answer. In the competitive setup, they entered a winner-takes-all tournament where the highest-scoring player got 2 dollars for every right answer, and the other players got nothing.

When the men and women were forced to compete, women won as often as men. But when Niederle and Vesterlund gave people a choice between the two setups, 75 percent of men chose to enter the competitive tournament, compared to only 35 percent of the women.

“In terms of money maximizing choices, high-performing women enter the tournament too little and low performing men too much,” Niederle wrote in a recent discussion of these kinds of papers.

“The result is that few women enter the competition and few women win the competition,” she continued.

###### An issue of confidence

In another one of her experiments, Niederle and co-author Alexandra Yestrumskas paid people to solve as many mazes as they could in 10 minutes. Participants could elect to work on easy mazes or hellish mazes. Easy mazes paid 50 cents each; hard mazes paid 25 cents each for the first four solved, and 3.50 dollars each thereafter.

This scheme forces people to assess their own skills. If you’re bad at solving mazes, you’ll make more money on the easy track. If you’re good at solving mazes, you should risk the hard track, which pays a lot more, but only if you can bang these things out.

At first, none of the participants knew how difficult the hard mazes were going to be, but they did get to try out the easy mazes. This way, the researchers found out who was good at doing mazes, and who was bad at them. The participants then got to choose to continue with the easy mazes, or to try doing the harder mazes.

All the men who killed it on the easy mazes tried the harder mazes. But only 65 percent of high-performing women decided to try the harder maze. Even among the low-performers, 88 percent of men chose the hard mazes, compared to 42 percent of women.

Is it that men just like a challenge and women don’t? Not so. In a follow-up experiment, the researchers informed the participants whether they were high-performing or low-performing after observing them on the easy mazes. With that knowledge, high-performing women were now twice as likely to choose the hard track. Again, this is a story about confidence in yourself. Men have it. Women seem to lack it. But a little encouragement can go a long way.

###### Well, now what?

Why do women behave this way? Culture, perhaps, can be more influential here than biology. An experiment from 2012 found that school-age girls in Colombia are even more competitive than boys, while the opposite was true in Sweden. In Niederle’s experiments, lack of self-confidence played a big role in explaining why women chose the easier maze game, and why they chose not to participate in the tournament game.

So one way to combat these differences would be to give women more encouragement. Niederle calls this the “Lean In” approach, after Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg’s book which told women that they should more aggressively pursue opportunities at work.

###### Changing the idea of competition

Another approach: changing the way that the world treats competition. In corporate world, some amount of American Psycho-ing is probably necessary. But sometimes there is competition that serves no end.

There’s a perception that competition is good, that it brings out the best in someone—but it can just as well drive children away, and prevent them from realizing her full potential.